# Release Process

This document outlines the release process for NGINX Gateway Fabric (NGF).

## Versioning

NGF uses semantic versioning for its releases. For more information, see https://semver.org.

> Major version zero `(0.Y.Z)` is reserved for development, anything MAY change at any time. The public API is not stable.

## Release Planning and Development

The features that will go into the next release are reflected in the
corresponding [milestone](https://github.com/nginxinc/nginx-gateway-fabric/milestones). Refer to
the [Issue Lifecycle](/ISSUE_LIFECYCLE.md) document for information on issue creation and assignment to releases.

## Releasing

Note: in the instructions below, `X` stands for the major version, `Y` -- minor, `Z` -- patch.

### Major or Minor Release

A Major or minor introduces new features.

To create a new release, follow these steps:

1. Create an issue to define and track release-related activities. Choose a title that follows the
   format `Release X.Y.Z`.
2. Stop merging any new work into the main branch.
3. Test the main branch for release-readiness. For that, use the `edge` containers, which are built from the main
   branch, and the [example applications](/examples).
4. If a problem is found, prepare a fix PR, merge it into the main branch and return to the previous step.
5. If the supported Gateway API minor version has changed since the last release, test NGINX Gateway Fabric with the previous version of the Gateway API CRDs.
6. If a compatibility issue is found, add a note to the [changelog](/CHANGELOG.md) explaining that the previous version is not supported.
7. Create a release branch following the `release-X.Y` naming convention.
8. Prepare and merge a PR into the **release branch** to update the repo files for the release:
    1. Update the Helm [Chart.yaml](/deploy/helm-chart/Chart.yaml): the `appVersion` to `X.Y.Z`, the icon and source
       URLs to point at `vX.Y.Z`, and bump the `version`.
    2. Adjust the `VERSION` variable in the [Makefile](/Makefile) and the `TAG` in the
       [conformance tests Makefile](/conformance/Makefile) to `X.Y.Z`.
    3. Update the tag of NGF container images used in the Helm [values.yaml](/deploy/helm-chart/values.yaml) file,
       the [provisioner manifest](/conformance/provisioner/provisioner.yaml), and all docs to `X.Y.Z`.
    4. Ensure that the `imagePullPolicy` is `IfNotPresent` in the Helm [values.yaml](/deploy/helm-chart/values.yaml)
       file.
    5. Generate the installation manifests by running `make generate-manifests`.
    6. Modify any `git clone` instructions to use `vX.Y.Z` tag.
    7. Modify any docs links that refer to `main` to instead refer to `vX.Y.Z`.
    8. Update any installation instructions to ensure that the supported Gateway API and NGF versions are correct.
       Specifically, helm README and `site/content/includes/installation/install-gateway-api-resources.md`.
    9. Update the [README](/README.md) to include information about the release.
    10. Update the [changelog](/CHANGELOG.md). The changelog includes only important (from the user perspective)
        changes to NGF. This is in contrast with the autogenerated full changelog, which is created in the next
        step. As a starting point, copy the important features, bug fixes, and dependencies from the autogenerated
        draft of the full changelog. This draft can be found under
        the [GitHub releases](https://github.com/nginxinc/nginx-gateway-fabric/releases) after the release branch is
        created. Use the previous changelog entries for formatting and content guidance.
9. Create and push the release tag in the format `vX.Y.Z`. As a result, the CI/CD pipeline will:
    - Build NGF container images with the release tag `X.Y.Z` and push it to the registry.
    - Package and publish the Helm chart to the registry.
    - Create a GitHub release with an autogenerated changelog and attached release artifacts.
10. Prepare and merge a PR into the main branch to update the [README](/README.md) to include the information about
    the latest release and also the [changelog](/CHANGELOG.md). Also update any installation instructions to ensure
    that the supported Gateway API and NGF versions are correct. Specifically, helm README and `site/content/includes/installation/install-gateway-api-resources.md`.
11. Update the production branch to the latest release branch in [Netlify](https://app.netlify.com/sites/nginx-gateway-fabric/configuration/deploys#branches-and-deploy-contexts). If it's your first time, log in using Gitlab SSO and ask the docs team for permission to access the NGF project. Ensure that once the branch is updated, the deployment pipeline in Netlify passes and that the published docs look good (no obvious errors or issues).
12. Close the issue created in Step 1.
13. Ensure that the [associated milestone](https://github.com/nginxinc/nginx-gateway-fabric/milestones) is closed.
14. Verify that published artifacts in the release can be installed properly.
15. Submit the `conformance-profile.yaml` artifact from the release to the [Gateway API repo](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api/tree/main/conformance/reports).
    - Create a fork of the repository
    - Name the file `nginxinc-nginx-gateway-fabric.yaml` and set `gatewayAPIVersion` in the file to the
    supported version by NGF. Also update the site source if necessary (see following example).
    - Open a PR. [Example](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api/pull/2514)
    If it's your first time submitting a PR, you will need to sign a CLA using F5, Inc. as the organization.

### Patch Release

A patch release is for an important fix that cannot wait the next major/minor release.

To create a new release, follow these steps:

1. Create an issue to define and track release-related activities. Choose a title that follows the
   format `Release X.Y.Z`.
2. If the fix applies to both the latest release and the main branch, then:
    1. Prepare and merge a fix PR into the in the main branch.
    2. Prepare and merge a fix PR (with a cherry-pick commit) into the existing release branch.
3. Alternatively, if the fix only applies to the latest release, prepare and merge a fix PR into the existing release
   branch.
4. Test the release branch for release-readiness.
5. If a problem is found, return to Step 2.
6. Follow Steps 6-9 from the [Major or Minor Release](#major-or-minor-release) section.
